# Mean-Variance Portfolio Optimization

<!---
This project is motivated by Yuri's lecture notes.
-->

**Portfolio optimization** is the process of selecting an optimal portfolio (asset distribution), out of a set of considered portfolios, according to some objective. The objective typically maximizes factors such as expected return, and minimizes costs like financial risk, resulting in a multi-objective optimization problem.[^1] In today's financial markets, investors are challenged with the task of allocating their assets across a variety of financial products, such as **stocks, options, and virtual currencies**. 

To effectively manage their portfolios, investors often rely on various quantitative models and optimization techniques. One popular approach is **Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)**[^2], which emphasizes the importance of diversification to reduce risk. MPT suggests that by combining assets with different risk and return characteristics, investors can achieve an optimal balance between **expected return** and **risk**.

Taking stocks as an example, the **expected return** and **risk** can be measured by the **mean** and **variance** of returns over a specific length of time period. Based on these indices, investors are able to select a combination of various stocks, which forms a portfolio, in order to optimize certain objectives subject to specific constraints.



## Problem A

Let's say, we are going to allocate **$1,000,000** asset over **1,000** stocks. You are provided with the **expected 6-month return** and corresponding **variance** of *each* stock in the past 3 years. Please help with selecting some portfolio(s) maximizing the objective function 

$$r_p - \frac{1}{2} \sigma_p^2$$
where $r_p$ is the expected 6-month return of the portfolio and $\sigma_p^2$ is the corresponding risk. 

Let $r_i$ and $\sigma_i^2$ denote the expected 6-month return and risk (variance) of stock $i$, given one unit asset investment. $\sigma_{ij}$ is the covariance between stock $i$ and $j$. We know that, if our portfolio is constructed by allocating $w_i \geq 0$ asset on each stock $i$ in a set of stocks, then the expected 6-month return of this portfolio
$$r_p = \sum_i w_i r_i$$ 
and the corresponding risk 
$$\sigma_p^2 = \sum_{i, j} w_i w_j \sigma_i \sigma_j = \sum_i w_i \sigma_i^2 + 2\sum_{i \neq j} w_i w_j \sigma_{ij}.$$ 



<!-- ## Problem B

**Sharpe ratio**[^3] of a portfolio is defined by 
$$\frac{r_p - r_f}{\sigma_p}$$
where $r_f$ is risk-free 6-month return in the market. You can think this as the amount of return generated by bonds or bank interests. Sharpe ratio can be interpreted as the ratio of excess expected return and corresponding risk (standard deviation).  -->







[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portfolio_optimization
[^2]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/modernportfoliotheory.asp
[^3]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/sharperatio.asp